---
title: Friday, June 17
---

# Friday, June 17

## Before Class

__Reading:__ Finish Part 2 of _Reality is Broken_   
__Video:__ EC: Quest Design 2

<iframe width="800" height="450" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ur6GQp5mCYs" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Lecture Notes

Today we are going to go back and look at the fixes to reality that McGonigal talks about in "Reality is Broken." You know, that book I assigned you to read for this semester?

Why do we make games? Is it as simple as helping people have fun? Is there more to it?

[Games for Change](http://www.gamesforchange.org/)

Fix #1: Unnecessary obstacles - Compared with games, reality is too easy. Games challenge us with voluntary obstacles and help us put our personal strengths to better use.

Fix #2: Emotional activation - Compared with games, reality is depressing. Games focus our energy, with relentless optimism, on something we're good at and enjoy.

Fix #3: More satisfying work - Compared with games, reality is unproductive. Games give us clearer missions and more satisfying, hands-on work. (clear goal and actionable steps)

Fix #4: Better hope of success - Compared with games, reality is hopeless. Games eliminate our fear of failure and improve our chances for success.

Fix #5: Stronger social connectivity - Compared with games, reality is disconnected. Games build stronger social bonds and lead to more active social networks.

Fix #6: Epic scale - Compared with games, reality is trivial. Games make us a part of something bigger and give epic meaning to our actions.

Fix #7: Wholehearted participation - Compared with games, reality is hard to get into. Games motivate us to participate more fully in whatever we are doing.

Fix #8: Meaningful reward when we need them most - Compared with games, reality is pointless and unrewarding. Games help us feel more rewarded for making our best effort.

Fix #9: More fun with strangers - Compared with games, reality is lonely and isolating. Games help us band together and created powerful communities from scratch.

Fix #10: Happiness Hacks - Compared with games, reality is hard to swallow. Games make it easier to take good advice and try out happier habits.

Fix #11: A sustainable engagement economy - Compared with games, reality is unsustainable. The gratifications we get from playing games are an infinitely renewable resource.

Fix #12: More epic wins - Compared with games, reality is unambitious. Games help us define awe-inspiring goals and tackle seemingly impossible social missions together.

Fix #13: Ten thousand hours collaborating - Compared with games, reality is disorganized and divided. Games help us make a more concerted effort - and over time, they give us collaborative superpowers.

Fix #14: Massively multiplayer foresight - Reality is stuck in the present. Games help us imagine and invent the future together.