---
title: What is a Game?
---

# What is a Game?

__Slide Deck:__ [What is a Game?](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Pp_B_0ItvXdJixniMwBKl2nFs5neCJc12BKBR-o3AOs/edit?usp=sharing)

__Game to Play:__ [Lonliness](https://www.necessarygames.com/play/loneliness/)

__Video:__ Extra Credits: What is a Game?

<iframe width="800" height="450" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/blj91KLOvZQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

If you randomly asked a person to answer the question "what is a game?," you would probably get a wide range of answers.  Or, potentially, just blank stares.  I mean, it's a game, right?  A game is... a game.  It's something you do when you don't have to do anything else?  It's what kids play?

Now if instead you asked "name a game," well then you'd probably get a whole list of games, ranging from card games to board games to video games to sports.  We can inherently "know" what a game is when we see it, but actually putting a definition to it can be difficult without having a more critical analysis.

Some of my favorite definitions of a game include:

> “Playing a game is the voluntary attempt to overcome unnecessary obstacles.” - Bernard Suits

and

> “A game is a system in which players engage in artificial conflict, defined by rules, that results in a quantifiable outcome.” - Salen & Zimmerman, Rules of Play

McGonigal provides a simple framework - a set of four defining traits - that will serve well as we begin to consider what a game is:

## Goals

In playing a game, there is something that the player is working to achieve.  Some goals are defined by the creator of the game and are incredibly obvious, such as:

* have the highest score after X amount of time
* defeat the final boss
* knock out the opposing players

But many goals are player driven.  These could include:

* beat the game as fast as possible, given a set of constraints (e.g. speedrunning)
* create a castle you can walk through in Minecraft
* earn a higher score than you did the last time you played

We will have many more discussion about the different types of goals throughout this course.

## Rules

Rules define how a player interacts with the game and provides the mechanisms by which the player can achieve their goals.  Rules force a player to work creatively within the confines of a particular space.

## Feedback

Humans love feedback.  We need to know when we are progressing (ever check your grades along the way in a class?).  Have you ever seen someone fall off from an exercise routine becuase they "weren't seeing results fast enough?"  This is one of the reasons gamification works.  It adds a layer of concrete, measurable, visible feedback to everyday activities.  Feedback tells us that what we are doing within the rules of the game is actually helping us to move toward our goal.

## Voluntary Participation

Or more broadly called "the magic circle," voluntary participation is the agreement of players to work within the agreed upon rules.  For example, playing golf doesn't really "work" if you decide to just pick up the ball and drive the cart to the hole.  You have to agree to the arbitrary rules of the game system you are working with.