---
title: Syllabus
---

# Syllabus

## Instructor Info

__Instructor:__ Prof. Mark Sherriff   
__Office:__ Rice 400   
__Office Hours:__ After class and by appointment        
__Email:__ [sherriff@virginia.edu](mailto:sherriff@virginia.edu)    

## Course Info

__Lectures:__ MTWRF 10:30 AM-12:45 PM   
__Textbooks:__
* Game Design Workshop: A Playcentric Approach to Creating Innovative Games by Tracy Fullerton - Available online as a PDF through UVA Library for free
* Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World by Jane McGonigal - [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Reality-Broken-Games-Better-Change/dp/0143120611)     

__Course Requirements:__
1. Prereq: Old Curriculum - CS 2150 / New Curriculum - CS 3140
2. Can attend class regularly.
3. You will be expected to learn programming languages and platforms on your own in this class! If you don’t feel comfortable with this, please talk to Prof. Sherriff as soon as possible!
4. Must have an appreciation for games. This does not mean that you are a “hardcore” gamer. What this means is that you will be expected to play games in this class in addition to the ones you create. Another way of thinking about it is you wouldn’t take a film making course if you hated watching movies...


## Description

_This course will introduce students to the concepts and tools used in the development of modern 2-D and 3-D real-time interactive computer video games. Topics covered in this include graphics, parallel processing, human-computer interaction, networking, artificial intelligence, and software engineering._ -SIS Course Description

Our course is an introductory course in video game design and production. We will focus on both the design and technical aspects of creating a game, from concept inception and prototyping through coding and playtesting. 

Upon successful completion of this course, students will:

* Understand the social and ethical context in which video games are developed, marketed, and played;
* Understand the technologies and platforms upon which modern interactive video games are developed;
* Understand the software engineering concepts necessary to develop video games (and other large systems) in a large development group;
* Comprehend the computational theory used in video games design, as well as, to a lesser extent, related fields (artificial intelligence, computer graphics, networks, etc.);
* Understand the theoretical topic of game theory, and how that applies to multi-player games (and, to a lesser extent, artificial intelligence).

## Major Topics

* What exactly are games?
* Game design documents and storyboarding
* Game engines
* Game physics
* Collision detection
* Game mechanics
* AI
* Pathfinding
* Graphics / Lighting
* Statistics / Probability / Game Theory
* Game balancing

## Assessment

You will be assessed in this course through a number of individual and partnered assignments.  Each assessment will be worth a set amount of Experience Points (XP).  As you complete assessments, your overall XP will increase, with a maximum of 1000 XP available throughout the entire class.  Further, I believe strongly in a positive-reinforcement grading methodology.  That is, you start each assessment with 0 XP and it is through your work that you earn XP, exhibiting your mastery of a topic.  XP cannot be lost or taken away in this course, except through extreme circumstances (e.g. I discover the work was not your own, thus you did not actually show mastery and the points were wrongly rewarded) or unprofessional behavior (e.g. it doesn't matter how "good" you are at something if you cannot work effectively in a team environment).

Some assessments can be resubmitted after they have been graded for more XP, as long as the student follows certain guidelines and deadlines.  This information will be posted with each assessment.

Letter grades will be awarded by reaching certain Levels by earning XP.  XP will not be rounded under any circumstances.

<style>
#cs4730table { width:100%; border: 1px solid black; border-collapse: collapse; }
#cs4730table th, #cs4730table td { border: 1px solid black; border-collapse: collapse; padding: 5px; width:33%;}
#cs4730table th { background-color: #CCCCCC; }
</style>

<table id="cs4730table">
  <tr>
    <th>Level</th>
    <th>XP Required</th> 
    <th>Letter Grade</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>25</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>50</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>100</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>200</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>300</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>400</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>500</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>550</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>600</td>
    <td>D-</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>625</td>
    <td>D</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>675</td>
    <td>D+</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>12</td>
    <td>700</td>
    <td>C-</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>13</td>
    <td>725</td>
    <td>C</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>14</td>
    <td>775</td>
    <td>C+</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>15</td>
    <td>800</td>
    <td>B-</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>16</td>
    <td>825</td>
    <td>B</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>17</td>
    <td>875</td>
    <td>B+</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>18</td>
    <td>900</td>
    <td>A-</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>19</td>
    <td>950</td>
    <td>A</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20</td>
    <td>1000</td>
    <td>A+</td>
  </tr>
</table>

The following assessments will be available during the class to earn XP:

<table id="cs4730table">
  <tr>
    <th>Assessment</th>
    <th>XP Available</th> 
    <th>Resubmitable?</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Random Encounters</td>
    <td>6 x 25 XP each = 150 XP</td> 
    <td>No</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Critical Analysis - <em>A Short Hike</em></td>
    <td>100 XP</td> 
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Critical Analysis - Student Choice</td>
    <td>100 XP</td> 
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Game Design Doc - Team Project</td>
    <td>100 XP</td> 
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Game Design Doc - Student Choice OR Choice Project</td>
    <td>100 XP</td> 
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mini-Boss</td>
    <td>100 XP</td> 
    <td>No</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Final Boss</td>
    <td>100 XP</td> 
    <td>No</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Game Project</td>
    <td>200 XP</td> 
    <td>Yes</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Student Participation and Evals</td>
    <td>50 XP</td> 
    <td>No</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Project Groups
You are expected to work as a member of your group in this course and cooperate with your colleagues. Cooperation means attending group meetings, completing your assignments properly and on time, letting your group know if you will be out of contact, responding to e-mail from your group, and so on. If there is a lack of cooperation by any group member, it must be brought to the attention of the instructor as soon as it happens. If the lack of cooperation is serious, the offending group member’s semester grade will be lowered.  

## Attendance
* As a summer session course that only meets a total of 19 times, it is VITAL that you are able to attend all classes.  If you have something scheduled during the summer session that will prohibit you from attending the class, then you should take the class another semester.  Excessive absences will count against you.

## Late / Missed Work Policy
* Late work can still be considered if the assessment allows for resubmission.  
* Work that does not have a resubmission option cannot be submitted late.
* Random Encounters cannot be made up if they are missed.
* If a student is going to miss the Mini-Boss or Final Boss, please talk with me ASAP.

## This Syllabus
This syllabus is to be considered a reference document that can and will be adjusted through the course of the semester to address changing needs. This syllabus can be changed at any time without notification. It is up to the student to monitor this page for any changes. Final authority on any decision in this course rests with the professor, not with this document.

## Professionalism
In this course, there will be a focus on working well together and learning about the development process. A large portion of that process involves interpersonal skills and conflict management. Students and staff are all expected to treat each other with respect.  This includes, but certainly is not limited to:

* Misuse of class platforms (Discord, Piazza, YouTube comments, etc.)
* Disrespectful language or actions to course staff or other students
* Promptness for all deadlines and class meetings
* Quality work
* Not working well with your partners
* Collaborating with other teams
* Not following University COVID regulations

Students can and will be penalized for unprofessional behavior.

## Academic Integrity
_Summary_:

* Know the honor code
* Work with your team, but not any other team
* Using code from other students (from any semester) is an honor violation
* Using publically-available example code and libraries is fine, but you must cite your resources
* More information on what is allowed will be included with each assignment if necessary
* It never hurts to ask the staff what is allowed or not allowed!

The School of Engineering and Applied Science relies upon and cherishes its community of trust. We firmly endorse, uphold, and embrace the University’s Honor principle that students will not lie, cheat, or steal, nor shall they tolerate those who do. We recognize that even one honor infraction can destroy an exemplary reputation that has taken years to build. Acting in a manner consistent with the principles of honor will benefit every member of the community both while enrolled in the Engineering School and in the future. 

Students are expected to be familiar with the university honor code, including the section on academic fraud [http://honor.virginia.edu/academic-fraud](http://honor.virginia.edu/academic-fraud). Assessments will describe allowed collaborations, and deviations from these will be considered Honor violations. If you have questions on what is allowable, ask! Unless otherwise noted, all assessments will be considered pledged that you have neither given nor received help. (Among other things, this means that you are not allowed to describe problems on an exam, assignment, or project to a student who has not taken it yet. You are not allowed to show exam papers to another student or view another student’s exam papers while working on an exam.) Sending, receiving, or otherwise copying or describing the contents of electronic files that are part of course assignments are not allowed collaborations (except for those explicitly allowed in assignment instructions). 

Assignments or exams where honor infractions or prohibited collaborations occur will receive a zero grade for that entire assignment or exam. Such infractions will also be submitted to the Honor Committee if that is appropriate. Students who have had prohibited collaborations may not be allowed to work with partners on remaining homeworks. 

Using code developed by previous students in the course or code written for your use by someone outside the course is not allowed and will likely be an honor violation. This does not apply to the use of publicly available frameworks and libraries, unless indicated in the assessment instructions.

In general, we expect that you will be using code, examples, and ideas from many different websites and resources for your projects.  This is allowed within reason.  Wholesale copying of an entire project or any major feature from any source (the web, another student, etc.) is definitely not allowed.  Using code snippts that you find to round out a feature is allowed.  If you ever have a question about what is or is not appropriate, ask first!

In ALL cases, you need to cite all sources at the top of the file where the code or algorithm was used AND you should note all sources in your documentation.  Failure to properly attribute your sources will result in a 50% penalty for the project at a minimum.

## How to Cite Code
Use the following format (or something functionally similar) as an example citing code you use. You may not have all of these fields available, but this should give you a good idea of things to look for.  Order by title of the software package.  Use the appropriate commenting format for the programming language of your source code.  Below is a general example of a citation format.  Does yours have to look *exactly* like this?  **No**, nor does it have to have all the fields.  It does have to have enough to give the proper credit and so we can find the resource if needed.

```
/***************************************************************************************
*  REFERENCES
*  Title: <title of program/source code>
*  Author: <author(s) names>
*  Date: <date>
*  Code version: <code version>
*  URL: <where it's located>
*  Software License: <license software is released under>
*
*  Title: ....
*
***************************************************************************************/
```

## Inclement Weather Policy
If there is the possibility of inclement weather that could affect class, it is your responsibility to stay informed.  Information about how to sign up for email and/or text alerts from UVA Emergency Management, along with the current University status, can be found at [https://uvaemergency.virginia.edu/](https://uvaemergency.virginia.edu/).

## SDAC and Other Special Circumstances
The University of Virginia strives to provide accessibility to all students. If you require an accommodation to fully access this course, please contact the Student Disability Access Center (SDAC) at 434-243-5180 or [sdac@virginia.edu](mailto:sdac@virginia.edu). If you are unsure if you require an accommodation, or to learn more about their services, you may contact the SDAC at the number above or by visiting their website at [http://studenthealth.virginia.edu/student-disability-access-center/faculty-staff](http://studenthealth.virginia.edu/student-disability-access-center/faculty-staff).

If you have been identified as an SDAC student, please let the SDAC know you are taking this class.  We happily and discretely provide the recommended accommodations for those students identified by the SDAC. Please contact us one week before an exam so we can make accommodations.

If you have other special circumstances (athletics, other university-related activities, etc.), please contact the instructor as soon as you know these may affect you in class.

## Religious Accommodations
It is the University's long-standing policy and practice to reasonably accommodate students so that they do not experience an adverse academic consequence when sincerely held religious beliefs or observances conflict with academic requirements. Students who wish to request academic accommodation for a religious observance should submit their request in writing directly to me by email as far in advance as possible. Students and instructors who have questions or concerns about academic accommodations for religious observance or religious beliefs may contact the University’s Office for Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights (EOCR) at [UVAEOCR@virginia.edu](UVAEOCR@virginia.edu) or 434-924-3200. 

Accommodations do not relieve you of the responsibility for completion of any part of the coursework missed as the result of a religious observance.

## Statement on Violence
The University of Virginia is dedicated to providing a safe and equitable learning environment for all students. To that end, it is vital that you know two values that I and the University hold as critically important:
 
1. Power-based personal violence will not be tolerated. 
2. Everyone has a responsibility to do their part to maintain a safe community on Grounds.
 
If you or someone you know has been affected by power-based personal violence, more information can be found on the UVA Sexual Violence website that describes reporting options and resources available - [www.virginia.edu/sexualviolence](http://www.virginia.edu/sexualviolence). 
 
As your professor and as a person, know that I care about you and your well-being and stand ready to provide support and resources as I can. As a faculty member, I am a responsible employee, which means that I am required by University policy and federal law to report what you tell me to the University's Title IX Coordinator. The Title IX Coordinator's job is to ensure that the reporting student receives the resources and support that they need, while also reviewing the information presented to determine whether further action is necessary to ensure survivor safety and the safety of the University community. If you would rather keep this information confidential, there are Confidential Employees you can talk to on Grounds (See [http://www.virginia.edu/justreportit/confidential_resources.pdf](http://www.virginia.edu/justreportit/confidential_resources.pdf)). The worst possible situation would be for you or your friend to remain silent when there are so many here willing and able to help.
