---
title: Critical Analysis
---

# Critical Analysis

First, watch this:

<iframe width="800" height="450" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/bb3HQlFmfds" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

What is a critical analysis, and why do we care?

Critical analysis is not just a game review. We are not concerned with how many out of five stars, or any numbers from 0 to 10, or whether or not a game is “fun” (whatever that means to you).

Critical analysis does not just mean a list of things that are wrong with the game. The word “critical” in this context does not mean “fault-finding” but rather a thorough and unbiased look at the game.

Critical analysis is useful when discussing or comparing games. You can say “I like the card game Bang! because it’s fun” but that does not help us as designers to learn why it is fun. We must look at the parts of games and how they interact in order to understand how each part relates to the play experience.

Critical analysis is also useful when examining our own works in progress. For a game that you’re working on, how do you know what to add or remove to make it better?

To complete a Critical Analysis assignment, write a paper (probably at least 2-3 pages) that does the following (and most likely somewhat in this order):

* Give a high-level description of the game, game’s history, or other introductory information you think is appropriate. I would expect also to see what you believe the games main aesthetics are here (as defined by the MDA paper).
* Describe the game’s formal elements. Do not interpret at this point, simply state what is there.
* Describe the results of the formal elements when put in motion. How do the different elements interact? What is the play of the game like? Is it effective?
* Specifically discuss the mechanics, dynamics, and aesthetics of the game.
* Try to understand why the designer chose those elements and not others. Why this particular player structure, and why that set of resources? What would have happened if the designer had chosen differently?

Some questions to ask yourself during a critical analysis at various stages:

* What challenges do the players face? What actions can players take to overcome those challenges?
* How do players affect each other?
* Is the game perceived by the players as fair? (Note that it may or may not actually be fair. Perception and reality often differ.)
* Is the game replayable? Are there multiple paths to victory, varied start positions, or optional rules that cause the experience to be different each time?
* What is the game’s intended audience? Is the game appropriate for that audience?
* What is the “core” of the game - the one thing you do over and over that represents the main “fun” part?

NOTE: Literally just answering the above questions WILL NOT result in a good score.  I expect you to put some thought into how best analyze the game you are looking at.  Some of these questions make no sense for certain games and tossing "an answer" to them in your paper would be frowned upon.

Submit a PDF of your paper to the appropriate assignment in [Gradescope](https://www.gradescope.com/courses/398201).

[An example Critical Eye on Hearthstone from Spring 2014](https://cs4730.cs.virginia.edu/materials/HearthstoneCriticalEye.pdf)

You will complete this assessment twice: once for the game _A Short Hike_ by by adamgyru and can be found at [https://adamgryu.itch.io/a-short-hike](https://adamgryu.itch.io/a-short-hike) and once for a game of your choosing.  This can be a game you have already played, although you may need to refresh your memory.  If you need some thoughts on what games to play, I'm happy to offer suggestions.  

Some content here used with permission from [Game Design Concepts by Ian Schreiber](http://gamedesignconcepts.wordpress.com/2009/07/06/level-3-formal-elements-of-games/).