---
title: Monday, June 6
---

# Monday, June 6

## Before Class

* Finish your prototype and upload a picture to the RE 4 assignment on Gradescope
* Submit your design doc for your team project if you have not done so
* Submit AT LEAST ONE of your critical analysis (you need to do this to stay on track to finish everything)
* Make sure your team's GitHub repo is online and working for your project / I will ask to see "something" for your project by Wednesday

## Lecture Notes

__Slides:__ [Game Architecture and Design Patterns](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1EDGBDS3w-QxHjnGcVrBrt0RUEJJc--7YTXbYJqj7pFU/edit?usp=sharing)

We start by demoing your physical prototypes!

Game Architectures. You’ve done so much up to this point in your programming career in the event-driven, object-oriented paradigm that switching to something else can be hard. But we’ll give it our best shot.

The first thing to consider is that games, by their nature, aren’t terribly event-driven. Sure, board games are, but that’s because it’s a player action that will kick off certain events that players themselves have to calculate. But that’s not what we want in interactive entertainment. We want the world changing around us, reacting to our moves (or non moves). So, that’s the first thing out of the window – event-driven programming. We need to poll the user’s actions and then react. It’s the game loop again.

We’ll look closer at what happens in the game loop to ensure we know what’s going on.

Now, that object-oriented bit.

Classes are great for what they do. But think for a second what you might end up with.

Let’s consider a shooter like Gradius. Is each set of power-ups a different class? I could see someone doing this (…shiver…).

    Basic Ship Class –> Faster Ship Class –> Faster Ship Class with Lasers –> Faster Ship Class with Lasers and an Option –> Faster Ship…

You get the idea. Class bloat gets ridiculous quickly.

How about another one that’s not quite as silly – RPG classes.

    NPC –> Human –> Human Warrior –> Human Supreme Warrior

At the same time….

    NPC –> Elf –> Elven Warrior –> Elven Supreme Warrior

What’s the proper breakdown here? Is each a different class? Which comes from which? And which definition is first – race or class?  Now, we don’t have to throw object-orientation completely out the window (this is C# after all…), but let’s look at other ways of solving certain problems. There are lots of games out there – they had to do something to get them to work.

Software design patterns are accepted solutions to repeating problems in software development. You’ve seen them before. USE THEM. They will help you know the best (well, at least not the worst) way to solve a given problem.

We’ll talk about what an ECS (Entity-Component-System) architecture looks like, how to use it, and the libraries that have been made to support it in MonoGame. And we’ll look at an example project.

From this, we’ll dive into data-driven design – the idea that all of the content (from art, to dialogue, to scripted AI) is encapsulated in standard formats OUTSIDE your engine, thus allowing easier parallel development.